[DNAINT-1516][DJM] Add `dbt` documentation (#26994)
DataDog/documentation: content/en/data_jobs/dbt.md

---
title: Enable Data Jobs Monitoring for dbt
further_reading:
    - link: '/data_jobs'
      tag: 'Documentation'
      text: 'Data Jobs Monitoring'
---

[Data Jobs Monitoring][1] gives visibility into the performance and reliability of dbt pipelines.

## Requirements

This guide is for [dbt-core][2] pipelines.

1. [dbt v1.8][3] or later.
2. [dbt-ol v1.26.0 ][4] or later.

## Setup

Follow these steps to enable dbt traces:

> 1. Install `openlineage` provider by adding the following into your `requirements.txt`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Install the `openlineage` provider by adding the following into your `requirements.txt`.
```

    ```text
    openlineage-dbt>=1.26.0
    ```

> 2. Configure `openlineage` provider. The simplest option is to set the following environment variables:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. Configure the `openlineage` provider. The simplest option is to set the following environment variables:
```

    ```shell
    export OPENLINEAGE_URL=<DD_DATA_OBSERVABILITY_INTAKE>
    export OPENLINEAGE_API_KEY=<DD_API_KEY>
    export OPENLINEAGE_NAMESPACE=<NAMESPACE>
    ```

  * Replace `DD_DATA_OBSERVABILITY_INTAKE` with `https://data-obs-intake.`{{< region-param key="dd_site" code="true" >}}.
  * Replace `DD_API_KEY` with your valid [Datadog API key][5].
  * Replace `NAMESPACE` if you want to use something other than the `default` namespace for job namespace.

**Optional**

> 1. Setup `OPENLINEAGE_DBT_LOGGING` environment variable, you can establish the logging level for the `openlineage.dbt` and its child modules.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. Setup `OPENLINEAGE_DBT_LOGGING` environment variable, you can establish the logging level for the `openlineage.dbt` and its child modules.
```

I do not fully understand this sentence.
I suppose it's "By setting up ..."
Also by "establish", do you mean I can choose the logging level that way?

Would be great to include an example and briefly explain what the example does.

Reviewer 3: Wondering if it might be better to put it in the Troubleshooting section, like adding `OPENLINEAGE_DBT_LOGGING=DEBUG` to enable debug logging

Author: Yep I agree. Putting it in the Troubleshooting section makes sense

> 1. Setup `OPENLINEAGE_DBT_LOGGING` environment variable, you can establish the logging level for the `openlineage.dbt` and its child modules.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Set up the `OPENLINEAGE_DBT_LOGGING` environment variable. This will establish the logging level for the `openlineage.dbt` and its child modules.
```

Check official documentation ([python client][6] and [dbt integration][7]) for other supported configurations of OpenLineage.

## Validation

> In your setup you can run the following `dbt-ol` command to see traces in Datadog.
> Say you are using the [jaffle-shop][8] project.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In your setup, you can run the following `dbt-ol` command to see traces in Datadog.
For example, if you are using the [jaffle-shop][8] project:
```

```shell
dbt-ol run --select orders
```

The above consumes dbt [artifacts][9] and sends OpenLineage events **after** the job finishes.
If you want to receive events in realtime you can use the `--consume-structured-logs` of `dbt-ol`.
```shell
dbt-ol --consume-structured-logs run --select orders
```

In Datadog, you can see the traces by using the following APM query:
```text

> operation_name:*dbt*

Reviewer 3: @warrierr what do you think of pointing users directly to traces for now ?

```

## Troubleshooting

Check that the OpenLineage environment variables are correctly set.
When running `dbt-ol` commands you should see log lines like:
```text
...
Running OpenLineage dbt wrapper version X.XX.X
This wrapper will send OpenLineage events ...
...
Emitted XX OpenLineage events
```

> ## Further Readings

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Further Reading
```

---
title: Enable Data Jobs Monitoring for dbt
further_reading:
    - link: '/data_jobs'
      tag: 'Documentation'
      text: 'Data Jobs Monitoring'
---

[Data Jobs Monitoring][1] gives visibility into the performance and reliability of dbt pipelines.

## Requirements

This guide is for [dbt-core][2] pipelines.

1. [dbt v1.8][3] or later.
2. [dbt-ol v1.26.0 ][4] or later.

## Setup

Follow these steps to enable dbt traces:

1. Install the `openlineage` provider by adding the following into your `requirements.txt`.
    ```text
    openlineage-dbt>=1.26.0
    ```
2. Configure the `openlineage` provider. The simplest option is to set the following environment variables:
    ```shell
    export OPENLINEAGE_URL=<DD_DATA_OBSERVABILITY_INTAKE>
    export OPENLINEAGE_API_KEY=<DD_API_KEY>
    export OPENLINEAGE_NAMESPACE=<NAMESPACE>
    ```

  * Replace `DD_DATA_OBSERVABILITY_INTAKE` with `https://data-obs-intake.`{{< region-param key="dd_site" code="true" >}}.
  * Replace `DD_API_KEY` with your valid [Datadog API key][5].

>   * Replace `NAMESPACE` if you want to use something other than the `default` namespace for job namespace.

Author: One way is to use different namespaces for different envs (prod/dev/staging)

Check official documentation ([python client][6] and [dbt integration][7]) for other supported configurations of OpenLineage.

## Validation

In your setup, you can run the following `dbt-ol` command to see traces in Datadog.

> For example, if you are using the [jaffle-shop][8] project:

Author: `dbt-ol` run --select <your_model_name>

```shell
dbt-ol run --select orders
```

The above consumes dbt [artifacts][9] and sends OpenLineage events **after** the job finishes.

> If you want to receive events in realtime you can use the `--consume-structured-logs` of `dbt-ol`.

Author: >What's the downside of having them get the data in realtime?

None. I'll only keep this option then.
